*
*YEAH, UH
* AHUH UH
* SOMETIMES I FEEL TRAPPED
IN THIS WORLD OF CRIME *
* WHEN I BOUGHT MYSELF A
MAC AND MY GIRL AND I*
* NOT PROMISED TO ANOTHER DAY,
MOTHER SAID A BROTHERS FACE *
* FIRST SON DIED NOW
MOTHERS AT ANOTHER WAKE. *
* MONEY WHO KILLS YOU
SMELLIN IN YOUR MOTHERS FACE. *
* WAS YOU RIGHT HAND MAN
TOLD YOU NEVER TRUST A SNAKE. *
* WHAT'S THE WHITE MAN'S PLAN
LOCK US IN OUR LONELY GATES. *
* FIRST TRIP IS TO BOOK US TO
AL. AND THEN YOU GO UPSTATE. *
* C.E.O. IS MORE RACISTS
THAN CLAN MEMBERS. *
* (UNINTELLIGIBLE)
CRAZY THEY HAND SLIT UP. *
* THOUGH YOU IN A BOX SO SMALL
THAT YOU CAN'T GET UP. *
* SLIDE YOUR FOOD UNDER
THE DOOR, THIS MEANS WAR. *
BETH NAVON: THE FRIENDS
OF ISLAND ACADEMY
IS AN ORGANIZATION THAT WAS
STARTED TO WORK AGAINST
THE FACT THAT MANY YOUNGSTERS
IN THIS CITY GET CAUGHT UP
WITH THE CRIMINAL AND
JUVENILE JUSTICE SYSTEM,
END UP IN JAIL OR DETENTION,
COME OUT AND RETURN.
SO THIS ORGANIZATION
WAS FOUNDED IN 1990,
WITH IT'S MISSION AND
IT'S GOAL TO PREVENT
THE RE-INCARCERATION
OF YOUNGSTERS.
AND TO SET THEM ON A PATH
THAT'S VERY DIFFERENT
FROM WHAT THEY HAD BEFORE.
TO PUT THEM IN EDUCATION AND
WORK AND MAKE THEM ULTIMATELY
SELF SUFFICIENT WITH
PRODUCTIVE, POSITIVE LIVES.
SO ONE OF THE THINGS
WE DECIDED VERY EARLY
WAS THAT WE REALLY
NEEDED TO HAVE
AN IN-HOUSE
EDUCATION PROGRAM.
THE NUMBER OF YOUNGSTERS
WHO CAN GO BACK
TO THEIR HIGH SCHOOLS
IS VIRTUALLY NIL.
THEY DON'T HAVE
HIGH SCHOOL CREDITS.
THEY'VE BEEN OUT OF SCHOOL,
BEFORE THEY WERE PICKED
UP AT 16, FOR YEARS.
SO WE HAVE A PROGRAM THAT
RUNS THE GAMUT FROM YOUNGSTERS
READING FROM 1ST GRADE TO
8TH GRADE, 9TH GRADE LEVEL.
WE HAVE 3 LEVELS.
WE HAVE LITERACY LEVEL.
WE HAVE BASIC ED. LEVEL.
PRE G.E.D. AND G.E.D.
AND THE G.E.D. IF YOU TAKE IT,
IS THE EQUIVALENT OF HAVING
A HIGH SCHOOL DIPLOMA.
AND THEN WE HAVE
A PROGRAM
THAT PUTS THOSE
YOUNGSTERS INTO COLLEGE.
SO TELL ME WHY YOU LIKE
FRIENDS OF ISLAND ACADEMY...
DON'T TELL ME LIKE I
LIKE IT, IT'S COOL.
WHY IS IT COOL?
YOU FEEL COMFORTABLE HERE AND
IT'S NOT LIKE REGULAR SCHOOL.
HERE A FEEL LIKE, I LEARN MORE.
ME, I DON'T KNOW
NOBODY HERE LIKE THAT.
THAT'S WHY I FEEL
LIKE, IT'S BETTER
CAUSE EVERYBODY IN
HIGH SCHOOL...
I KNEW EVERYBODY.
EVERYBODY WAS ON A
NEGATIVE ATTITUDE,
NEVER WANTS TO GO TO SCHOOL.
DO BAD THINGS SO..
EVERYBODY COMES HERE...
WE ARE ALL JUST
TRYING TO STAY FOCUSED.
WE ARE NOT FROM
THE SAME PLACES
BUT WE BEEN THROUGH
SIMILAR STUFF SO.
WE THE FUTURE SO I'M
TRYING TO BE LIKE,
WHEN THE NEXT
GENERATION GROW UP,
I WANT TO BE LIKE, HAVING MY
OWN BUSINESS OR WHATEVER.
YOU KNOW LIKE, HELPING OTHER
KIDS TRY TO FOLLOW THEY WAY.
YOU KNOW LEAD THEM LIKE.
CAUSE THERE WAS NO
MENTORS FOR ME LIKE.
ANYTHING THAT HAPPENED LIKE,
I HAD TO THINK OF IT MYSELF
AND I NEVER THOUGHT
ABOUT IT TWICE.
ANYBODY THINK LIKE
THIS EDUCATION
THAT WE GOT AWAY FROM SO
MUCH FOR WHATEVER REASONS,
FOR WHATEVER HAPPENED,
WE GOT AWAY FROM IT
AND THAT ONE THING, IT
SEEMED LIKE THAT EDUCATION,
THOSE BOOKS AGAIN
SEEMED TO BE LIKE
THIS THING THAT'S
GOING TO SAVE US.
IT'S GOING TO OPEN UP
A WHOLE LOT..
IT'S GOING TO
MAKE US SEE.
I NEED AN
EDUCATION LIKE..
IT FEELS LIKE A
MIRACLE GOT US...
A HOLY THING
GOING ON RIGHT,
LIKE A SAVIOUR
FOR REAL LIKE.
IT HELPS YOU IN HERE LIKE
TO DO WHAT YOU GOTTA DO LIKE
MR.P SOMETIMES HE BE TRIPPIN BUT
THAT'S MY DUDE RIGHT THERE.
HE MAKES ME LIKE THINK
TWICE LIKE GET THIS G.E.D.
HE PUSHING US TO
GET OUR G.E.D.
IN ANOTHER SCHOOL I WASN'T
EVEN WORRIED ABOUT THAT.
I WOULD JUST SIT IN THE
HALLWAYS AND DO WHAT I DO,
AND THEN LEAVE OUT THE FRONT OF
THE BUILDING TO DO WHAT I DO.
BUT HERE IT'S LIKE YOU FEEL GOOD
TO BE IN SCHOOL LIKE BASICALLY.
FEELS GOOD TO SAY I
LEARNED SOMETHING TODAY.
*
LIZ SHAW: WE HAVE A LOT OF
DIFFERENT ACTIVITIES
THAT WE TRY TO ENGAGE THE
YOUNG PEOPLE IN AFTER SCHOOL,
AND FAMILY MEETING
IS ONE OF THEM.
HAPPENS EVERY THURSDAY AT 4:30
AND IT'S JUST AN OPPORTUNITY
FOR THEM TO GET
SOME POSITIVE ENERGY.
TALK ABOUT SOME OF THE
THINGS THAT GOING ON
WITH THEM DURING THE WEEK.
AND JUST REFLECT AND
GO INTO THE WEEKEND
WITH A GOOD SPIRIT.
I THINK THERE IS
SOMETHING VERY STRONG
WHEN ANOTHER YOUNG
PERSON CAN TELL SOMEONE
THAT LOOKS AND RESEMBLES THEM
ABOUT THEIR EXPERIENCES
AND HOW IT CAN IMPACT THEM.
AND THEN THE REWARDS
THAT COME ABOUT
FROM THEM DOING
JUST THAT.
IF YOU COULD SUM UP
IN ONE WORD FOR ME,
SOMETHING THAT HE TRIED
TO CONVEY TO YOU,
WHAT WOULD IT BE?
CHANGE.
CHANGE?
YEA.
THAT'S GOOD.
PEER TO PEER EDUCATION
IS EXTREMELY IMPORTANT
AND IT'S VERY EFFECTIVE
BECAUSE IF NEGATIVE FORCES
CAN INFLUENCE A YOUNG
PERSON, THEN OBVIOUSLY
WE HAVE TO BE ABLE TO
TURN THE TABLES ON THAT.
SO I THINK THAT'S WHY THE PEER
EDUCATION IS SUCCESSFUL.
STUFF IS KINDA RUFF
FOR ME RIGHT NOW
BUT I LOVE YOU GUYS SO...
WE LOVE YOU TOO MAN!
* DO IT, DO IT!
DANCE INSTRUCTOR:
THROUGHOUT MY LIFETIME,
I USED TO DO THAT
PROFESSIONALLY,
WHERE I DANCED
FOR CELEBRITIES
AND I DONE TOURS AND
THINGS OF THAT NATURE.
SO I THOUGHT THAT THE
NEED THAT SINCE I'M HERE
AND I LANDED HERE AT
FRIENDS OF ISLAND ACADEMY,
IT WAS ONLY RIGHT
FOR ME TO BASICALLY
GIVE BACK TO THE KIDS.
TO SHOW SOME OF THE SKILLS
THAT WE HAVE AS FAR AS OUR
CULTURE AND THE THINGS THAT WE
DEVELOP ON A DAY TO DAY BASIS.
SO I FELT IT WAS POSSIBLE
FOR THE KIDS TO LEARN
THOSE STEPS AND MOVES WHICH
WILL PLAY A VITAL ROLE,
I'M SURE, IN THEIR
LIFETIME SOMEDAY.
BOOM UP BOOM.
MY NAME IS JESSICA BENNETT.
I WAS WITH THIS
AGENCY FOR ABOUT A YEAR.
FRIENDS OF ISLAND ACADEMY
PRETTY MUCH WITH ALL THOSE
ACTIVITIES GOING
ON IS KINDA GOOD
FOR THE TYPICAL PERSON I
WAS BEFORE I CAME HERE.
I WAS PRETTY MUCH YOU KNOW JUST
GETTING INCARCERATED A LOT.
IN AND OUT OF BOOKINGS,
JUST HANGING AROUND
WITH THE WRONG CROWD.
THE NEIGHBORHOOD
THAT I LIVE IN,
THE ONLY ACTIVITIES THAT'S
AROUND IS PRETTY MUCH NEGATIVE.
AS YOU KNOW, THE
SELLING DRUGS,
HAVING SEX FOR
MONEY AS A FEMALE,
YOU KNOW TRYING TO STAY SO
CALLED "FLY" SHALL I SAY.
YOU KNOW MONEY DO RULE THE WORLD
SO THE WAY HOW TO GET MONEY,
YOU GOTTA DO
NEGATIVE THINGS.
NOW IT'S IMPORTANT TO ME
AND FOR ANY OTHER CHILD
IN NEW YORK CITY,
HAVING ACTIVITIES WHERE EVER
THEY AT IS A GOOD THING
LIKE YOU SEE WHAT I SAID WITH
THE HIP HOP DANCE CREW.
PRETTY MUCH EVERY FRIDAY
AROUND 3-4 O'CLOCK
WE GET TOGETHER AND
THEY'LL TEACH US ROUTINES
AND WE PRETTY
MUCH LEARN THEM,
STAY AS A TEAM,
GET IT DOWN PAT.
GET READY FOR ANY PERFORMANCES
WE GOTTA TAKE CARE OF
LIKE BEYONCE'S AUDITION.
YA "THE" BEYONCE KNOWLES.
YA WE PRETTY MUCH
WENT TO HER AUDITION,
WE DID KINDA GOOD
CAUSE WE GOT CALLED BACK.
SO IT'S JUST A GOOD EXPERIENCE
THAT YOU WAS INCARCERATED,
NOW TO BE DOING AUDITIONS
WITH BEYONCE IS LIKE
A TOTAL TRANSFORMANCE YOU
UNDERSTAND WHAT I'M SAYING.
AND JUST KNOWING THAT IT WAS
A HOBBY AND NOW IS A CLASS.
CAUSE WE COMING
HERE EVERY FRIDAY
AND LEARN NEW ROUTINES
ALL THE TIME.
EVERY FRIDAY WE
LEARN NEW ROUTINES.
LIKE DANCING I STILL
DO, I GO TO PARTIES,
I ACTUALLY DO AS AN
EXERCISE IN HOUSE.
IT'S PRETTY MUCH MY HOBBY
AND NOW I COULD TAKE IT AS
SOMETHING PROFESSIONAL
AND IT FEELS KINDA GOOD.
IT MAKES IT POSITIVE LIKE I'M
ACTUALLY DOING SOMETHING THAT
COULD TAKE ME THROUGH A
JOURNEY IN LIFE.
*
ANSWER QUESTIONS CLEARLY
AND BE INVOLVED
WHEN THEY DO ASKED
A QUESTION.
SO THESE ARE SOME OF THE
ONES I'VE HIGHLIGHTED
AND SOME OF THE ONES
WE ARE GONNA GO OVER
AFTER WE COMPLETE THE
APPLICATION PROCESS.
THE HARDEST THING ABOUT
MY JOB IS GETTING
THE YOUTH AND THE MEMBERS HERE
TO BELIEVE THAT THEY CAN
HAVE A SUCCESSFUL,
PRODUCTIVE LIFE IN SOCIETY.
THE REAL SECRET TO
SUCCESS IS MAKING THEM
BELIEVE IN THEMSELVES.
THAT'S THE HARDEST PART, GETTING
OVER A LOT OF BAD BARRIERS
AND A LOT OF THINGS THAT
THEY'VE GONE THROUGH
PRIOR TO COMING HERE.
AND BREAKING ALL OF THOSE DOWN,
IT TAKES TIME.
ALONG WITH TAKING TIME, IT ALSO
INVOLVES GIVING THEM TRAINING
SO THAT THEY CAN
BEGIN TO UNDERSTAND
THEY CAN COMPETE
WITH EVERYBODY.
BUT THAT'S LIKE CHIPPING
AWAY AT A LITTLE BRICK
AND IT'S HARD FOR
SOME YOUNG PEOPLE.
SOME COME AND THEY'RE ABLE TO
ACCEPT IT AND MOVE FORWARD.
I HAVE A LOT OF
HOPE IN MYSELF.
I DIDN'T REALLY.
THAT'S WHY I NEVER
WENT TO SCHOOL.
I DIDN'T THINK ALL
OF IT MATTERED.
I WAS LIKE, I'M GONNA
GET A JOB
BUT THEN I STARTED
REALIZING OH,
NOBODY'S GONNA HIRE
A DUMMY.
I MIGHT AS WELL
FINISH SCHOOL,
GET THE EDUCATION THAT
I'M SUPPOSED TO HAVE
THEN GO SHOOT FOR
A NICE JOB.
BERYL DAVID: THE PROCEDURE IS
WHEN YOU COME IN HERE,
WHETHER YOU HAVE A
RESUME, YOU'VE HELD A JOB,
OR WHATEVER YOU MUST
GO THROUGH THE PROCESS.
THE PROCESS CONSISTS
OF APPLICATION WRITING,
MAKING SURE THAT'S THE
ONE THING YOU CAN DO,
THEN RESUME, MAKING A RESUME.
THEN AFTER THAT THEY'RE GIVEN
AN INTERVIEW BY MYSELF AND
THEN I COULD WORK WITH THE
YOUNGSTER IN TERMS OF SAYING
WELL YOU SAID TOO MUCH OR
YOU DIDN'T SAY ENOUGH
OR YOU DIDN'T SIT
UP OR WHATEVER.
THE LAST AND FINAL PART IS
GETTING CLOTHS AND SENDING
THEM TO THE CONTACTS THAT
WE DEVELOPED OVER THE YEARS.
KRYSTAL: I DON'T
KNOW WHAT TO FEEL
CAUSE I NEVER HAD A JOB
INTERVIEW BEFORE.
I NEVER HAD A JOB.
I NEVER HAD TO WORK FOR
ANYBODY OR DOING ANYTHING LIKE
THAT SO I DON'T KNOW WHAT TO
EXPECT BESIDES A COUPLE OF THE
QUESTIONS MISS B. MIGHT
OF ASKED ME BUT..
WOW..
ME? A JOB INTERVIEW.
OH MAN.
IT'S GOING TO BE
LIKE CHRISTMAS.
I DON'T THINK I'M GOING TO
BE ABLE TO SLEEP TONIGHT.
THE FIRST INTERVIEW AND THE
FIRST TIME THAT THEY GO OUT,
THAT IS WHAT
REALLY ENGAGES THEM.
THAT'S WHAT REALLY DOES IT.
THAT OPENS THE DOOR AND
THEY LET IT ALL COME IN NOW.
THEY FEEL A
LITTLE MORE CONFIDENT.
THEY CAN BELIEVE THAT THEY
ARE GOING TO BE SUCCESSFUL.
SO INTERVIEWING, THEY COME
BACK HAPPY WITH THAT.
BUT THE FIRST JOB..
I TELL YOU I THINK I'M MORE
HAPPY THEN THEY ARE BECAUSE
THEY'RE SO EXCITED.
AND THE JOY THAT YOU SEE AND
THE THRILL OF THEM KNOWING NOW
I CAN REALLY DO THIS.
I CAN REALLY MAKE SOME MONEY.
I MEAN IT'S INDESCRIBABLE.
IT'S SOMETHING YOU KNOW
THAT'S KEPT ME HERE
FOR AS LONG AS I'VE
BEEN HERE.
BECAUSE I ENJOY HEARING
AND FEELING THE HAPPINESS
AND THE GRATITUDE THAT THEY SHOW
WHEN THEY HAVE BEEN SUCCESSFUL.
*
* BIRDS CHIRPING
MY NAME IS XIOMARA GARCIA.
I'M A SOCIAL WORKER AT
THE ADOLESCENT PORTABLE
THERAPY PROGRAM.
ADOLESCENT PORTABLE
THERAPY IS A PROGRAM
THAT WAS DEVELOPED 5
YEARS AGO TO HELP KIDS
IN THE JUVENAL JUSTICE
SYSTEM SUBSTANCE ABUSE.
IT'S ACTUALLY THE ONLY HOME
BASED SUBSTANCE ABUSE PROGRAM
CERTIFIED BY THE OASIS
PROGRAM IN NEW YORK STATE.
SO IT'S PRETTY UNIQUE BECAUSE
WE DO DO THE FAMILY THERAPY
COMPONENT AND THE
SUBSTANCE ABUSE
SO IT'S NOT JUST WORKING
WITH THE CHILD.
IT'S WORKING WITH THE FAMILY
AND THEIR SUPPORT SYSTEM.
THE HOME IS WHERE
EVERYTHING GOES ON.
THATS KIND OF LIKE THE EPICENTER
OF EVERYTHING AND THE COMMUNITY.
AND SO WHAT YOU SEE IS
THEY GO FROM FACILITY
BACK TO THE COMMUNITY WHERE
THERE'S NOT A LOT OF STRUCTURE.
THEY'RE BACK IN
THEIR ENVIRONMENT.
THERE IS SOME SORT OF
MISCOMMUNICATION WITH THE
PARENTS ESPECIALLY IN THE
ADOLESCENT POINT OF LIFE.
YOU KNOW THEY'RE TRYING TO BE
WITH THEIR FRIENDS A LOT AND
TRYING TO MAKE THEIR
OWN PERSONALITIES
AND TRYING TO DECIDE
WHAT'S BEST FOR THEM.
YOU HAVE YOUR FRIENDS THERE,
YOU HAVE YOUR FAMILY
AND THERE IS A LOT
MORE PRESSURE.
SO IT'S NICE TO HAVE A PROGRAM
THAT FOLLOWS THEM THROUGH
THE JUVENAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
AND HELPS THEM TRANSITION
FROM FACILITY
BACK TO HOME.
HEY!
HI!
HOW ARE YOU?
ALRIGHT, HOW YOU DOING.
I'M GOOD.
IT'S NOT HOT TODAY AS IT
USUALLY IS WHEN I COME HERE.
NO, I HAVE THE AC
READY FOR YOU .
THANK YOU, YOU
KNOW ME ALREADY.
YOU KNOW THAT I NEED THE AC.
HEY DYQUAN.
HOW YOU DOING?
MY NAME IS PAULA AND I
GOT INVOLVED WITH A.P.T.
THROUGH A SOCIAL WORKER
AT MY HEALTH CLINIC.
I JUST HAD SOME CONCERNS.
MY SON WAS ALREADY IN CUSTODY.
I NEW THAT HE HAD
USED MARIJUANA.
XIOMARA: ONCE THE KIDS COME
OUT OF FACILITY,
YOU WORK WITH
THEM FOR 4 MONTHS.
AND IN THOSE 4 MONTHS
WE DO INTENSIVE FAMILY
AND INDIVIDUAL SUBSTANCE
ABUSE THERAPY.
WE ARE SEEING THEM ONCE
MAYBE TWICE A WEEK
DEPENDING WHAT THE
NEEDS ARE OF THE FAMILY.
USUALLY ONCE A WEEK.
WE DO PHONE CHECK-INS,
PHONE SESSIONS,
AND FROM THAT POINT ON WE ARE
REALLY WORKING WITH THE FAMILY
TO HELP CREATE A
SUPPORTIVE SYSTEM.
ALRIGHT, ENROLL IN
SCHOOL WHICH WE HAVE TO DO.
YA SO WE'RE GONNA FIGURE THAT
OUT NOW THAT IT'S JULY SO...
THERE IS MEET WITH AFTERCARE
WHICH YOU'VE BEEN DOING
CONSISTENTLY THE FEWS
WEEKS THAT YOU'VE BEEN HERE.
WHICH HAS BEEN GOOD.
MEET WITH A.P.T.
YOU HAVEN'T STOOD
ME UP YET.
AND WHEN YOU NEEDED
TO CANCEL YOU CALLED
WHICH IS EXCELLENT AND
VERY MUCH APPRECIATED.
THE END GOAL OF THE FAMILY..
IT'S NICE WHEN ARGUMENTS
START DECREASING
AND POSITIVE COMMUNICATION
STARTS INCREASING
SO MORE USE OF POSITIVE
REENFORCEMENT.
WHEN THE KIDS AND THE
PARENTS ARE ABLE TO SEE
WHAT THE TRIGGER IS
FOR AN ARGUMENT,
AND STOP IT BEFORE
IT EVEN STARTS,
AND EITHER WALK AWAY OR
JUST KNOW WHAT IT IS,
AND THEN COME BACK AND THE
PARTY WOULD TALK ABOUT IT.
WHEN HE WAS ARRESTED
THE FIRST TIME,
DID YOU KNOW WHERE HE
WAS SUPPOSED TO BE AT
OR DID YOU THINK HE
WAS SOMEWHERE ELSE?
ACTUALLY YES, HE WAS SOMEWHERE
AND HE WASN'T SUPPOSED TO BE.
I WAS GOING OUT WHEN
I WAS LIKE 13 - 14
AND IT'S LIKE AFTER
AWHILE I GUESS SHE..
CAUSE I WAS AWAY FOR
TWO YEARS SO IT'S LIKE
SHE WASN'T USED TO
ME NO MORE.
LIKE I WASN'T THERE
SO WE DIDN'T REALLY
HAVE THAT CONNECTION
NO MORE.
THE FIRST DRUG TEST USUALLY
CAN BE REALLY NERVE RACKING.
THE TEST SO..
SO BASICALLY JUST GO IN
AND PEE AS MUCH AS YOU CAN.
I MEAN YOU DON'T HAVE TO
FILL IT UP OR ANYTHING
AND THEN WE'LL TAKE
A LOOK.
XIOMARA: SO IT'S REALLY AN
ANXIETY THAT FORMS.
YOU FEEL THE TENSION
IN THE HOUSE
BECAUSE YOU HAVE THE PARENT
WHO'S KINDA LOOKING
AT THE KID SAYING IT
BETTER BE NEGATIVE.
NO PRESSURE.
THE MOST DIFFICULT PART OF
SUBSTANCE ABUSE THERAPY
IS MOST OF THEM USE IT AS
A COPING MECHANISM.
THEY USE IT TO ESCAPE
THE PROBLEMS AT HOME,
THE PROBLEMS IN THE
COMMUNITY, PROBLEMS IN SCHOOL,
WHATEVER THE CASE IS IT'S AN
ESCAPE AND IT'S REALLY GETTING
THEM TO SEE THAT THERE
ARE OTHER WAYS TO COPE.
THERE ARE
HEALTHIER WAYS TO COPE.
AND GETTING THEM TO
SEE THEIR STRENGTHS.
OK THAT'S FINE.
ALRIGHT YOU ARE
GONNA PEEL THIS AWAY.
IN DYQUAN FOR EXAMPLE HE
USED THE MARIJUANA TO COPE
WITH FAMILY LIFE,
WITH THE CHANGES,
WITH 9/11, WITH EVERYTHING.
FORTUNATELY FOR HIM HE HAS
A STRONG PASSION FOR MUSIC.
PRODUCING, WRITING.
I MEAN HE'S REALLY
TALENTED AND SO
HIM BEING ABLE TO USE
MUSIC AS AN OUTLET
HAS REALLY HELPED HIM SEE THAT
MARIJUANA ISN'T THE KEY.
AT FIRST WHEN
I WAS UPSTATE.
WHEN I WAS LOCKED
UP OR WHATEVER.
I THOUGHT IT WAS GONNA BE
HARD BUT WHEN I CAME HOME,
AND THE MIND
FRAME I PUT,
THE MINDSET I CREATED
FOR MYSELF IS LIKE..
I CAN'T SEE MYSELF
GOING BACK DOWN THOSE
SAME ROADS LIKE
SMOKING AND DRINKING.
AND I CAN'T SEE
MYSELF DOING THAT.
I'M TRYING TO
BETTER MYSELF NOW.
I GOT HIGH STANDARD FOR
MYSELF NOW.
I JUST CAN'T SEE MYSELF
GOING THOSE ROUTES AGAIN.
I THINK YOU SEE THE
TWO LINES WITH EACH ONE?
THAT MEANS THAT
THEY TESTED NEGATIVE.
HE TESTED NEGATIVE
FOR MARIJUANA USE,
FOR OPIUM, COCAINE
AND AMPHETAMINES.
GIVE YOURSELF A
ROUND OF APPLAUSE.
YOUR DOING SOMETHING
BIG SON.
IT'S A BIG STEP.
HOW IS IT FOR YOU
TO FINALLY SEE IT.
LIKE IT'S ACTUALLY JUST
THE PROOF OF ME NOT SMOKING.
I DON'T LIKE
THE FEELING,
I DON'T LIKE THE
COOLNESS OF IT.
IT SEEMS THERE IS
NOTHING COOL ABOUT IT.
I DON'T LIKE IT NO MORE.
XIOMARA: WHEN YOU SEE THOSE
NEGATIVE DRUG TESTS
AND YOU SEE THE EXCITEMENT
IN THEIR FACE,
I MEAN THAT IS JUST
ITS A GOOD FEELING.
TO SEE THEM BE EXCITED FOR
WHAT THEY'VE ACCOMPLISHED.
IT'S PROOF THAT I HAVE
NOT BEEN DOING ANYTHING
AND IT FEELS GREAT.
ONCE THE FIRST ONE IS DONE
AND THEY SEE HOW PROUD AND HOW
GOOD IT FEELS TO HAVE THAT
NEGATIVE RESULT AND HOW GOOD
IT FEELS FOR A PARENT
TO SAY I'M PROUD OF YOU,
IT KIND OF SETS IT
UP FOR THE NEXT ONE.
I THINK THAT THE
A.P.T. MODEL WORKS,
I REALLY DO BELIEVE IN IT.
TO BE ABLE TO WORK WITH
A FAMILY IN THE HOME,
IN THEIR NEIGHBORHOODS, TO
REALLY SEE WHAT THEY SEE
HELPS US KINDA BUILD GOALS
AND NOT BE UNREALISTIC
ABOUT CERTAIN THINGS.
AND IT HELPS THE FAMILY
TRANSITION AND HELPS THE KIDS
TRANSITION FROM FACILITY BACK
HOME AND IT'S ONE LESS THING
THAT THEY HAVE TO TRAVEL TO
AND WE GO TO THEM SO IT'S NICE
TO BE ABLE TO TAKE THE THERAPY
TO THE PARK ON A NICE DAY OR
STAY IN AN APARTMENT OR
TAKE THEM OUT TO EAT.
I MEAN THE FLEXIBILITY
HELPS SO MUCH,
AND JUST HAVING
A PROGRAM
THAT HELPS THEM TRANSITION
INTO THE COMMUNITY.
I THINK IT'S A
WONDERFUL THING.
*YEAH, UH
* AHUH UH
* SOMETIMES I FEEL TRAPPED
IN THIS WORLD OF CRIME *
* WHEN I BOUGHT MYSELF A
MAC AND MY GIRL AND I*
* NOT PROMISED TO ANOTHER DAY,
MOTHER SAID A BROTHERS FACE *
* FIRST SON DIED NOW
MOTHERS AT ANOTHER WAKE. *
* MONEY WHO KILLS YOU
SMELLIN IN YOUR MOTHERS FACE. *
* WAS YOU RIGHT HAND MAN
TOLD YOU NEVER TRUST A SNAKE. *
* WHAT'S THE WHITE MAN'S PLAN
LOCK US IN OUR LONELY GATES. *
* FIRST TRIP IS TO BOOK US TO
AL AND THEN YOU GO UPSTATE. *
* C.E.O. IS MORE RACISTS
THAN CLAN MEMBERS. *
* (UNINTELLIGIBLE)
CRAZY THEY HAND SLIT UP. *
* THOUGH YOU IN A BOX SO SMALL
THAT YOU CAN'T GET UP. *
* SLIDE YOUR FOOD UNDER
THE DOOR, THIS MEANS WAR. *
* TIME TO TALK ABOUT IT....